[GENTLE MUSIC]
>> Hi.
It's James here
from Food Matters.
And welcome to this special
interview with Dawson Church.
Dawson is a character
who is bigger than life.
He has a PhD.
He's a multiple
bestselling author,
including the books
"Genie in your Genes"
and "Mind to Matter."
And today, we're
going to be talking
about how your thoughts and
your emotions and your feelings
literally become your reality
and the gross impact that
can have on your life, both
positively and negatively
and what you can do about it.
Dawson, hello.
>> Great to be here, James.
Thank you.
>> Yeah.
So you have a unique
viewpoint when it
comes to emotions and thoughts.
What are they specifically,
in your opinion?
>> Well, when we say,
thought or emotion,
we think of something
insubstantial, intangible.
And yet, our
thoughts and emotions
are driving changes
in our bodies,
changes in the world around
us every single moment
with every single thought.
Just like, for example,
inside our bodies.
We have the stress hormones
like adrenaline and cortisol.
If I have you think about
a stressful thought,
think about anything
that stresses you out,
if you have a rise
in emotion, you're
literally creating
those molecules,
those stress hormones
in your body.
And you're not doing
it in half an hour,
an hour of that
negative thought.
You're thinking and
doing those things
and you're creating those
molecules within seconds
of having that thought.
So in that way,
every single thought
we have, positive or negative,
is producing biological shifts
inside our bodies.
>> And with these thoughts--
and can you decouple
this sort of relationship
that I'm struggling with,
which is like thought, belief,
or emotion?
What are the difference
between those?
Or are they all the same?
Or what comes first?
>> Yeah.
That's a good question,
thought, belief, and emotion,
because what is a
thought, what is
a belief, what is an emotion?
And how do they
relate to each other?
The way I would conceptualize it
is that thoughts are transient.
But beliefs are long term.
And a belief is a
pattern of thought.
So you might have
a fleeting thought.
But if you think that
thought over and over
and over again-- just
say, for example,
a thought of
self-criticism or something
you don't like about
the world or blame
you have towards somebody
else or a big system
like a government
or a corporation,
all of those thoughts, if
you hold them consistently,
can solidify into fixed
beliefs and worldview.
And so, for example,
you might initially
have the sense are things
not being good in your life,
may have adverse experiences.
And then that may
develop into a belief
that the world is
an unsafe place.
Now you're driving high
cortisol, high adrenaline.
You're triggering
gene expression
and a whole cascade
of biological events
with that belief.
If you then add emotion
and believe that strongly,
when you're passionate
about your belief,
now you're adding
fuel to the fire.
And that's when you'll see a
big increase in gene expression,
big increase in
those stress hormones
like adrenaline and cortisol.
And emotion is adding
fuel to that process.
A thought held lightly doesn't
have a lot of biological impact
on your body.
But a thought that is
backed by strong emotion
can have a huge
effect on your body.
Now over time, this produces
big, adverse effects
on the body.
And that thought
is a transient one.
So I had this
negative thought, you
might see a very
small shift and gene
expression and a small
rise in stress hormones.
But if you think that
thought persistently,
day after day after day, if it's
a belief, becomes a world view,
and you have emotion with it.
Now you're raising
your cortisol level
over and over and over again.
So high cortisol over time leads
to reduced muscle mass, reduced
bone density, increased
skin wrinkling,
degradation of digestion.
All of these things start
to be affected negatively
by those thoughts
held for a long time.
People under high stress
or high cortisol--
eventually, cortisol
literally begins
to calcify the memory and
learning centers in your brain.
Your hippocampus can get
calcium deposits on it
if you have high
cortisol over time.
Now you want calcium
in your bones and teeth
and places like that.
You do not want calcium
forming in your hippocampus,
your memory learning center.
That's exactly what happens
in stressed people over time.
So now your mind, your
consciousness fueled by emotion
is producing substantial
changes in your brain.
The software of mind is turning
into the hardware of brain.
And now you have a different
brain affected by stress.
But if you meditate,
if you do EFT tapping,
if you spend time in nature,
if you're in your heart,
if you spend time
with loved ones,
you have rich social
networks, all of these things
go into reverse.
Now you're not making
lots of cortisol.
You make lots of DHEA and
other positive hormones.
And DHEA is also called
the youthening hormone.
So now with high levels of
DHEA, all those aging signs,
all those things
go into reverse.
A happy person has high
DHEA, high oxytocin.
Oxytocin then sparks
the production
of neurochemicals like
anandamide, the bliss molecule,
in your brain, like
nitric oxide which
makes you alert in your life.
All these positive
things happen when
you are a positive thinker,
when you meditate, when you tap,
when you do all these
practices that center you
and give you a positive
affect mood outlook.
So now thought, consciousness
fueled by positive emotion
is becoming vibrant health.
And that's the direction
you want to nudge yourself
in with every thought.
People think their
thoughts are innocuous.
They think they're
insubstantial.
But they're affecting your
body every single moment.
I remember when I was working on
my book, "Genie in Your Genes"
and I was getting knee deep into
this research many years ago,
reading these studies.
One day, I was reading
a scientific paper.
And my kids were teenagers then.
And I ran out of my office,
waving a paper by my head,
brandishing this.
I said to my son,
I said, "Lionel,
if you'd read this, if
you knew what I know now,
you would never have a
single negative thought
in your entire life."
And really, if you knew the
harm it did to your body,
you would do your utmost to
quit that negative thinking
immediately.
>> And yet we don't.
It's dizzying to think.
One of the things we just
spoke before we started
this conversation
was about how much
we allow ourselves to be
conditioned by our environment.
What are the dangers
of allowing ourselves
to be overrun with thoughts and
emotions from our environment
and not really
controlling them, per se?
>> One of the depressing
statistics is how many people
check their phones first
thing in the morning.
They wake up and they look at
their social media accounts.
They check email first
thing in the morning.
And that's over half the people,
in some surveys about 2/3
of people do this.
There are studies showing that
some people check their cell
phones during
sexual intercourse.
[LAUGHING]
This is an addiction.
That's addictive behavior.
We're addicted to stuff and
very little of it is positive.
So we're filling our minds with
negative news, negative inputs.
We're not taking
control of our health.
We're handing
control of our health
and our thoughts and our
beliefs to other people
outside of ourselves.
And we're handing our thoughts
and control of our beliefs
over to people who just want to
make a buck off negative news.
So one study, for example,
looked at the world.
And it compared the world
to news about the world.
Now if you look at
actual objective measures
of human flourishing,
they're fantastic.
In the last 33 years,
human global wealth
for the average
citizen has tripled.
Over the last century, the
human lifespan has, on average,
doubled.
We now have about half the
CO2 production per unit of GDP
we had 20 years ago.
If you look at human rights, if
you look at infant mortality,
virtually every
measure of flourishing
shows we're improving.
Globally, IQ is rising by about
three points every decade.
So if you just look
at all the statistics,
everything points to us
being an unprecedented era
of human flourishing.
Now what's happening in
the media is the opposite.
One team of scientists did
a word analysis of words
in the New York Times.
They did from 1945
to the present.
And of course, we have
records going back that long
with the New York Times.
And they found that over the
years, the number of words
like good and positive,
happy, all of those words
were in steady decline.
And words like horrific
and tragic and violent,
all these negative
words were going up.
Even as the actual state of the
world is in improving steadily,
our perception of it, as
portrayed by the media,
is getting worse.
In fact, that same team,
they looked at word analysis
from 130 countries, all
their media since 1975.
And they found the same pattern.
All over the world,
we're being told
things are worse
and worse and worse
while they're getting better
and better and better.
And so what happens when
we wake up in the morning
and we then hand our
conscience over to Facebook
and Google and Instagram and
all these external sources?
We're then saying, you've got
to program my mind for me.
And you're getting a completely
inaccurate view of the world
by doing that.
What I recommend
you do instead--
what I do every morning is,
I wake up in the morning.
And immediately, I
attune to what I call
in my books non-local mind.
We have our consciousness.
But our consciousness is not
the artifact of a complex brain.
Our brain is more
like a transceiver
of information from
non-local fields
and a translator of that
information into local reality.
We literally make up
local reality around us
with our brains.
So if you wake up in the
morning and you, of course,
have a local mind,
you have a local body.
But if you immediately
attune it to non-local mind,
non-local reality, then
the news you're getting
is the news of the universe.
And it is positive.
It is full of abundance and
love and compassion and joy.
So now, you're plugging
yourself into all of that.
You aren't plugging yourself
into all the negative media,
the negative inputs and
filling your mind with that.
You're plugging into reality.
That stuff out there
is not reality.
This stuff up here is reality.
The mystics, the saints,
the sages throughout history
have told us that you lose
yourself in an ocean of bliss
when you're there.
Now what starts
happening in your body
then is not high cortisol,
is not high adrenaline.
It's high DHEA.
It's high oxytocin.
It's high anandamide,
the bliss molecule.
It is nitric oxide.
It is norepinephrine,
which helps you stay alert.
All these beneficial
shifts happen in your body.
Your brain secretes
beta endorphins.
So you begin a
meditation practice.
Beta endorphins are the
natural form of morphine.
They are three
times more powerful
than synthetic morphine.
So now you see, you start
your meditation practice.
You feel a bit of
ache in your back.
Your tummy's rumbling.
If you feel a
little bit of a neck
ache from exercising
too much yesterday.
And suddenly, you're in bliss.
You've forgotten
about your body.
That's beta
endorphin kicking in.
So you now have all
these beneficial hormones
and neurotransmitters kicking
in because you plugged yourself
into the information source
of the universe, which
has nothing but love for you and
love for everything around you.
So that's how you want
to start your day.
And those are the beneficial
biological changes
you want to be
producing in your body,
not all these negative
ones that come
from plugging in to
the outside world
to these thoughts and ideas
and worldviews and stories that
come from the news.
>> Beautiful.
And I think that goes a
long way to describing
in a scientific way,
what happens when people
have a spiritual experience.
I want to talk a little bit more
on your "Genie in Your Genes"
work, because I
thought that was really
foundational in
helping us understand
the power of epigenetics.
Because we have bought into
this idea that we are victims,
we're victims to our genes.
And that if we get
something, well, that's
because my mom had it
and my mom's had it.
And that's simply not
true with the research
that you're helping
bring to prominence.
What is the study
of epigenetics?
And how can we understand
it more deeply in order
to re-empower ourselves?
>> So epigenetics is changes in
genes triggered by factors that
come from outside the genome
and often, outside the body.
And a simple
example is that, say
you're walking through
the park one day.
It's a beautiful summer's day.
You're feeling wonderful.
And then a pitbull breaks
loose of its owner,
rushes over to you with
fangs open, mouth open,
fangs dripping with saliva,
just barking furiously at you,
running into you.
Suddenly, your whole day shifts.
You then move into
fight or flight
and you're going to react to
this threat from the outside.
So your body is translating
this external stimulus
of the pitbull into internal
biochemical molecular
messengers.
And those are going
throughout your whole body.
And they're pushing
you into stress, not
in 20 seconds or five minutes.
That's too late.
Those genes reach
peak expression
in under three seconds.
So now your body's
flooded with adrenaline,
flooded with cortisol
very, very quickly.
And you're then
responding to that threat.
So that's how this
works epigenetically
and how an external stimulus can
produce an internal response.
Now that's the way the stress
response is meant to work.
Our ancestors survived
because they had a hair
trigger stress response.
And in any tribe, any ancient
tribe 100,000 years ago,
500,000 years ago, those people
with the best stress response,
with the best ability to turn
those genes on in a flash
and make lots of adrenaline,
those people lived.
The happy people
like you or me ?
[LAUGHS]
The Vikings marauded
and they died
because they didn't have
that quick stress response.
The meditators, you
know, they were just
sitting there in the cave
and they got slaughtered.
So we've been bred
now for millennia
to have a lightning fast stress
response, which was perfect
when there were tigers and
mastodons and all kinds
of predators around us.
Now the worst
predator we have is
our thinking, our own thoughts.
So now I go back home.
The pitbull event
is five hours old.
I didn't get injured,
nothing bad happened.
And I'm telling the story to
my child and I'm getting upset.
I can feel my
heart racing faster
as I think about the pitbull.
My face is flushing.
I am having the
same stress response
in response to my own
thinking and emotion
as I had to the pitbull.
And again, if we do
that over and over
and over again, if we retell the
sad, tragic story of our past,
if we stay stuck
in our childhood
traumas and the unresolved
issues of our past,
if we remain there over
and over and over again,
it has a terrible
effect on our bodies.
One of the studies in my
book, "Mind to Matter"
compares the lifespan of
optimists versus pessimists.
People who have a cheery and
positive frame for their lives,
they have all the same
problems as other people.
They may have been fired a job.
They may have had
a financial crash.
They may have had all
kinds of personal problems.
But they have an optimistic
take on the world.
It compares their
lifespan to pessimists.
And the difference in lifespan
is eight years, eight years.
Those optimists live eight
years longer than pessimists.
And those aren't
eight years spent
on a respirator
in a nursing home.
Those are eight
healthy years as well.
So just think about
that for a moment.
Just the way you hold things
may not be that apparent to you
when you're 20 or 30.
But when you're
40 and 50 and 60,
you start thinking
very seriously
about those last eight years
and the quality of life
you have in those eight years.
That's going to be
radically shifted
by your thoughts and
your emotions right now.
>> That's easy to say for
someone who is inherently
optimistic or grew up in a nice
household with a comfortable
life.
But what about someone
who was abused?
What about somebody who had
sexual abuse as a child?
What about somebody who
was beaten as a child?
was neglected or abandoned
and not loved and is
now out in the world,
playing out the way
that they're responding
to that in adulthood?
How can they become
aware of these emotions?
And what can they do about them?
>> There are two
kinds of trauma.
There is simple trauma and
there's complex trauma.
And complex trauma is
usually developmental trauma.
So an example of
simple trauma is,
somebody who's 25 years old,
they have a terrible car crash.
And they're in the
hospital for a long time.
It takes them a
great many months
to regain physical function.
And this shatters their lives
in some fundamental way.
That's a simple trauma.
A complex trauma is one
where there was abuse,
often as a child.
And if there's
developmental trauma
where you were beaten over
and over and over again
or whether you were being
neglected, whether you were
being raped, whether you were
being physically assaulted,
and it was repeated.
And that's a different
kind of trauma
because the brain is growing
while that trauma is happening.
And that information is
being installed at the level
of circuits in your brain.
It's not just a thought
or a belief or one event.
It is crucial, it is
fundamental to the actual way
your brain wired together.
For the first two years of life,
the fastest growing rate brain
region is the limbic system.
So the limbic system,
the emotional midbrain
is the fastest
growing brain region.
It's not a part of the
brain that has language.
That's Broca's area over
here behind our temple.
That's the language part.
This is the center of our
brain, the emotional midbrain,
that's the fastest
growing part of our brain.
It has no language but it
feels and feels deeply.
And so if you're
being traumatized
while that part of
your brain is growing,
then trauma is woven into
the neural fabric of the way
your brain structure is.
And so that kind of
trauma is hard to treat.
We find in trauma
treatment manuals
and approaches that simple
trauma is relatively easy,
but developmental
trauma, complex trauma
is hard to treat.
So how does that
person get through it?
And you can't easily get through
it using cognitive techniques,
using thought or
language based therapies.
I can't sit you in
a chair and say,
you shouldn't feel
that way, because it's
fundamental to the way
your brain functions.
So for example, there
was a famous psychiatrist
called Joseph Wolpe.
After World War
II, he was working
with veterans of World War II.
And these men, for the most
part men, had shell shock.
They were dreadfully
affected by the war.
And he was a good
Freudian therapist.
So he laid them on the couch to
do the talking cure and said,
tell me about Omaha Beach.
And he wrote in
one of his books,
he said, he came
to the realization
after doing this with
those soldiers, he said,
that kind of therapy
is not ineffective.
It's harmful.
And a later term, it's
re-traumatizing to remember
the bad stuff, to remember
the pitbull attack,
remember the car
accident, remember
your buddies was being
blown to bits on the beach.
By replaying that in your mind,
that thought, now stimulating
that emotion is actually
re-traumatizing you.
And as you fire those neural
circuits in your brain,
they wire together bigger
and bigger and bigger.
So we find, for example,
that stress circuits
like the amygdala grow
in people who have
been traumatized in that way.
And learning and memory circuits
like those in the hippocampus
actually shrink over time.
So we're doing brain
remodeling with our thoughts.
Our thought aren't just
producing some kind of emotion
or experience in our minds.
They're producing neural
tissue in our brains.
And if you start to use that
neural tissue over and over
again, then it becomes
hard to change.
So you can't use
cognitive techniques
for development trauma
or preverbal trauma.
You need energy techniques.
And we have huge
numbers of them.
We have acupuncture which
affects the flows of energy
in the body's meridians.
We have acupressure
like EFT where
you interrupt that thought and
that experience with pressure
or tapping on a point.
With energy medicine, energy
psychology techniques.
And these work below
the level of thought.
They work at the level of
the body's energy system.
What we see, for
example, on MRI or EEG
scans is massive shifts in
the body's usage of energy.
As you shift the energy of the
body, then the form of the body
shifts as well.
>> Profound because these are
the type of techniques that
generally incite a lot
of skepticism in people.
And yet, I love your
work because you're
bringing deep science to this.
Let's zero in on EFT or
tapping for a little bit.
What is it?
And in your opinion, is this
one of the most effective
techniques people can learn to
use in order to, not only just
calm the body and the mind, but
get through things like trauma
or phobia or complex
trauma, like you said?
>> EFT is a very
simple technique.
It has you think about
something that bothers you.
Now when you think about
a thing that bothers you,
you're activating all the
circuits in your brain
that carry that information.
So you then have your brain
working in a certain way.
You have certain
circuits lit up.
If you think about
things that bother you
over and over and
over again, you
make those circuits bigger
and bigger and bigger.
But if you interrupt that
pattern with something else,
then you are able to
break that signaling.
And then your brain no
longer uses that circuit.
And the something else, in the
case of EFT, is acupressure.
There are over 300 meridian
points of the body.
They're organized into
14 meridian lines.
And EFT has you apply
acupressure in the form
of fingertip tapping like this
to about 13 of those points.
There are seven in the
brief form of EFT and 13
in the long form of EFT, as
well as using eye movements.
And what you see in
people's EEGs and MRIs when
they do this is
that, your first have
them think about the problem.
When they think
about the problem,
about the event in their
life, about the bomb blast,
about the car crash, about
the terrible divorce,
whatever it might be, you find
the emotional brain is all
lit up in an MRI or in an EEG.
You see all this activity
in the emotional midbrain.
When people start tapping,
it sends a second signal
to the brain of safety.
Because if you're being
chased by a tiger,
you would not be tapping.
[LAUGHING] So now, the
brain's getting two inputs.
It's getting this signal
from your memory saying,
be stressed, be
stressed, be stressed.
Danger, danger, danger, danger.
And so your second signal,
a somatic signal of soothing
in the form of tapping.
And it prioritizes that soothing
signal, just the way your mom,
when you're crying,
hopefully as a baby,
she would stroke your face.
She would stroke your head.
She would touch you.
Touch is a fundamental safety
signal that we as animals,
as mammals understand.
Every animal understands touch.
So say your dog, every time
it sees a car coming by,
it just starts
barking and goes crazy
and gets really wildly excited.
Goes into fight
or flight itself.
Runs after the car.
And you want to
calm the dog down.
You can explain to the
dog really logically
why running after cars
is such a bad idea
and is likely to lead
to the dog's demise.
And you can get really
super clear with the dog,
and paint her a great
word picture of why
the dog shouldn't do that.
But that isn't going to work.
But if you stroke the dog,
that will calm the dog.
So the dog understands
touch in a way which
it doesn't understand language.
Same thing with us.
Our emotional midbrains
understand touch.
When a friend of
yours is crying,
you don't have to
explain to them
why they shouldn't feel so bad.
You put your arm around them
and touch will soothe them.
So EFT is stroke you and a dog.
[LAUGHING]
It calms the emotional midbrain.
And it's really amazing.
On MRI scans, we have
people imagine a trauma.
There midbrain gets
all lit up in the MRI.
We have them tap.
It just shuts down.
>> Wow.
One thing you didn't describe
was, what does EFT stand for?
And is there a difference
between EFT and tapping,
or that's all the
same sort of thing?
>> EFT stands for emotional
freedom techniques.
It's also called tapping because
you tap on acupressure points
while you're thinking
about a negative problem
or event in your life.
And yeah.
There is a big difference.
You need to make
sure you use what
we call clinical EFT, which
is a form of EFT validated
in over 100 clinical trials.
Because it's not a
trademark term or practice.
So there are people who
say, I'm an EMT practitioner
but all they've
done is read a book
or watched a YouTube video.
So that'll get you somewhere,
the basic forms of EFT.
But to really unlock
the full power of EFT,
you need trained practitioners
to work with you.
>> Beautiful.
Fantastic.
So how can people identify--
because we've spoken
to a lot of people
about this idea of
limiting beliefs,
which really translate
into limiting thoughts
about ourselves in our lives.
But people might sit
there and they go--
they might they might
take stock of their life.
Well, I've got this.
I've been diagnosed
with this illness
and I've got this
financial travel
and I'm on my second
marriage and on this.
But I don't have any
limiting beliefs.
So if you speak to them,
that's abstract to them.
They're like, well, what
is a limiting belief
and how does that work?
So how can people
identify if they
might have limiting beliefs
or thoughts about themselves
in terms of how it could
be impacting their lives?
>> Listen to yourself talk.
There are all kinds of
phrases people pick up
from their family, from their
tribe, things like, I'm waiting
for the other shoe to drop.
Things like, you're
over the hill.
Things like, money
doesn't grow on trees.
All the men are taken.
These are all beliefs
people have and they come up
in our language and
our cliches we use.
So those tend to be our beliefs.
And we express them often.
Often they're below the
level of conscious thought
and we believe they're true.
But they aren't true.
All of the men aren't taken.
Money actually
does grow on trees,
because we use paper
fabric to create it.
[LAUGHING] So you
want to be in a space
of challenging those
beliefs when you hear them.
And so what things do you
say, what worldviews do you
have that are true?
Very little of what we
believe about the world
actually is true.
So it's worth asking that
question, is it really,
really true?
You know, it's also
an interesting.
I'm working on a new book
now, called "This Brain,"
on ecstatic mental states.
>> Low states.
>> Yeah, low states.
And like, there are all kinds
of questions unanswered like,
how much meditation do you need?
What is meditation?
Like, there's no agreed
definition in EEG studies
about what meditation even is.
So if you know what it
is, how do you measure it?
How much do you need?
How much is too much?
Is there too much?
What brain structures
are changed?
And by how much meditation?
So I love science
because this tells you,
it quantifies all this stuff.
It's not vague.
It's like, well, double
the take for two hours
because if you're in--
I define meditation as
sustaining an alpha state
for 15 seconds or more.
That's it.
If you can sustain an alpha
state for 15 seconds or more,
you in stable alpha.
You have lots of
theta and delta.
That triggers gamma
and shuts down beta.
So it's just a formula
that you can just
train people to acquire.
And so initially, it takes me
in workshops about four minutes
to train people to acquire that.
Untrained, it takes people about
30 to 40 minutes to acquire it.
If they're meditatives, they can
sit there for about 40 minutes
and get there.
But if you do certain
just simple things,
you get there in four minutes.
With practice, you are
there in 90 seconds.
But only because
we have science.
And we're reverse engineering.
These Tibetan monks have been
doing this for 40,000 lifetime
hours do.
We know what these
patterns look like?
So I just love the
science behind all this.
>> Well, what about some of the
more esoteric stories of like
Milarepa and these people that
have meditated in these caves
and they're able to move matter.
You see that hand
going through the cave.
What do you make of that
as a scientist, per se?
>> Yeah.
So thoughts create things.
Thoughts obviously
create molecules,
like stress molecules
or well-being
molecules inside our body.
But our thoughts create things
outside of our bodies, as well.
And there are four
fundamental forces in physics.
And those are
electromagnetism, gravity,
the strong nuclear force
that holds charged particles
together in the
center of an atom,
and the weak nuclear force,
which is radioactive decay.
Those are the four
fundamental forces of physics.
And there's research or evidence
showing that consciousness,
the human mind, human beings,
our consciousness effects
all four forces of physics.
There is a series of
studies of a Qigong master.
And when he's got a lump
of radioactive substance
in front of him, they
asked him to speed up
the radioactive decay.
Now, you shouldn't be able to
speed up radioactive decay.
Radioactive decay is the
basis of atomic clocks.
There's a cesium clock, one
of several used by scientists
to measure time.
Because in science, you
need super accurate measures
of time.
This atomic clock is
accurate to one second
in four million years.
That's how stable radioactive
decay is, or should be.
Until this Qigong master,
they tell him, speed it up
and it speeds up by 10%.
They then say,
let's slow it down.
He slows it down by 9%.
And there are
several experiments
showing that people,
consciousness alone, just
standing there looking at
a lump of radioactivity,
can actually slow down
or speed up that process.
That's a remarkable
human ability.
Electromagnetism.
In one study, a healer
was working on mice
who were distant from him.
They were at a university
lab some distance away.
And his pager went
off at random times
and told him to send healing
energy to those mice.
Now another part of the
university, in a different lab,
there was another
set of control mice.
And he did not send energy
to those control mice.
Below the cages of
both sets of mice,
there was a device that measured
the level of electromagnetism
in the room.
And so at random intervals,
again, just randomly,
this healer is asked
to send healing
to only one of those
two groups of mice.
And at that very moment,
that electrical field,
that field in the room, changed
by over 20% only at the moments
when he was sending healing
energy to those mice
and only in the
experimental mice
and not in the other
mice in the other lab.
So here, human beings
having over 20%
affect on what should be a
completely impartial, stable
law of physics,
electromagnetism.
And there are studies showing
that these facts are distant.
They happen over
large distances.
They happen reliably.
You can replicate them.
So our consciousness
is literally
changing matter
outside of our bodies.
Here I am drinking
a glass of water.
I drink about a
gallon of H2O a day.
Now water is a really
interesting substance.
Our bodies are 70% water.
But even the other
30% is largely
a matter of water molecules.
So our bodies are over
90% water, actually,
water molecules.
And research shows that when
people have a healing intention
and place that healing
intention into water,
the water begins to shift.
And water is, of course,
everyone knows, water is H2O.
We have one big oxygen molecule,
two little hydrogen molecules.
And the bonding angle,
the angle of that bond
between those three
molecules is 104 degrees.
That's always true.
Whether the water is in the
form of ice or steam or liquid,
it's always at that same bonding
angle of 104 and 1/2 degrees,
always.
Unless I bless the water.
When I bless the water, when
I send healing intentions
to the water, that molecular
angle literally shrinks.
If I take that water
that's been blessed
and water plants with it and
water another batch of plants
randomly with water that
hasn't been blessed,
the plants that are watered
with the blessed water
grow faster, are stronger, and
have more chlorophyll in them
than the unblessed ones.
So human consciousness
is literally
able to shift the molecular
bonding angle of water.
And then when we use
that mode for things,
then it produces
different effects
in other living systems
and beings like plants.
So we are literally shifting
all these four forces,
fundamental forces of
physics all around us
all the time with
our consciousness.
>> So if we're
somewhat 90% water,
isn't the thoughts that we
have about ourselves quite
important?
>> Vital.
Imagine if you're shifting
the water inside of yourself
in a way that's
making you healthy
and happy or
unhealthy and unhappy.
That's why those
pessimists in that study
die eight years younger
than the optimists,
because again, the
thought then correlates
with shifts in their bodies
and with their lifespans.
>> We're taught that the
subconscious mind has
an enormous power over us.
And you've explained
this earlier,
how these emotions and
these thoughts and feelings
get trapped in the
subconscious mind.
And we've spoken about
energy medicine as well.
Where does hypnotherapy come
into this in your perspective?
Is that something that
you've looked into?
>> In my books, I talk about
really important practices like
EFT tapping, like meditation.
But there are many of them.
There's time in nature.
Time in nature is
incredibly important.
Grounding, earthing
is important.
Quality social relationships
are absolutely vital.
If you look at the
relationship between people
and how they affect
each other, it's
clear that social relationships
play a huge role in health.
So there are many
practices like this.
And so the idea is
not to say, this
is the best practice or
the practice you need.
Some people love yoga.
Some people prefer
Qigong or tai chi.
Some might prefer
martial arts or dance.
So same thing with therapy.
Some people respond really
well to cognitive therapies.
Others, energy therapies,
others hypnotherapy.
So you want to play around with
this whole beautiful bundle
of possibilities and then find
the one that works for you.
Like someone said
to me once, tell me,
Dawson, you've done
all this research.
You've looked at all
these different therapies.
Which is the best therapy?
I said, OK, I'll tell
you the best therapy.
The best therapy is the
one that works for you.
Another time,
someone said to me,
what's the very best
form of meditation?
I said, the best
form of meditation
is the one you
will do every day.
[LAUGHING] So play around in
all these different techniques
and then pick the
one that resonates
with you energy system, with
your psyche, with your history,
with your body.
>> In your books, you talk about
a lot of different case studies
of people that have been able to
achieve some pretty incredible
results, either through
visualizing healing in the body
and then maybe able to go
into remission from a cancer,
or being able to bounce back
from a really significant
financial or a life
trauma or issue.
What are some of the main
ones that stand out for you,
that you really, really enjoy?
>> One of our therapists was
working with a woman in her
early 30s.
And this woman wanted
a relationship,
but she had a succession
of failed relationships.
And her belief was, all
the good men are taken.
She had this fixed belief.
So the therapist worked
with her on that belief.
Using EFT, she worked on
shifting that fixed belief.
She also had to make a list
of all the ideal qualities she
wanted to see in a man.
And it was a long list.
There were 47
items on that list.
So after a few sessions of
working on that fixed belief
that all of the men
are taken, the client
came in to see the therapist
and said, I've met this guy,
and it's wonderful.
I began to see him.
And the therapist said, well,
how many of your 47 qualities
does he have?
And she said, well, not all 47,
but he has about 42 of them.
So he's over the threshold.
And so in the course
of the session,
the therapist asked the client
just basic questions about,
where did you meet him?
I met him at work.
And then the therapist asked the
client, just in terms of office
geography, where does he work?
How far is he from you?
And the client said, about
two cubicles down from me.
And the therapist said, and
how long has he worked there?
And the client said, six months.
And the therapist
thought to herself,
Mr. Right has been
working two cubicles away
from her for six months.
And she couldn't see him
because of her belief
that all the good men are taken.
And they actually
got married later on.
The therapist stayed in touch
with them for several years.
And they were a
perfectly happy couple.
So that belief was stopping her
from seeing her future husband
two cubicles away from
her for six months.
That's how powerful
beliefs can be.
Now when you're trapped
in negative belief
and you're trying to build
positive neural capacity
and new beliefs, it's hard.
Because your brain is used
to functioning in those ways.
We know from the work of Nobel
Prize winning professor, Eric
Kandel, that if you pass a
signal through a neural bundle
repeatedly for an hour, the
number of synapses can double,
or the number of
signaling hardware
can double in one hour.
And so what if
you've been passing
angry thoughts or
resentful thoughts
or guilty thoughts
or shameful thoughts
through those circuits for
years and years and years?
You now have massive
neural bundles dedicated
to sending those signals.
And now you think, gee,
I'm a miserable person.
I'm horrible to my kids.
I abuse my wife.
I miserable on my job.
I keep on having
financial disasters.
I'll go take a weekend
workshop at the Dawson Church,
or Bruce Lipton or Deepak
Chopra or someone like that.
And so they go to a Tony
Robbins workshop or Jody Spencer
workshop or a Marianne
Williamson workshop.
And now you feel great
after the workshop.
You're in this temporary
state of euphoria.
You feel so good.
But then Monday morning, you're
back in your regular life
with all the
stimuli that trigger
the firing of those neural
bundles which you've been
building for the last 30 years.
And you revert right
back to the way you are.
So that's the challenge
of personal growth.
We have to build that
signaling capacity.
We have to build that belief.
We have to build those
positive circuits,
even before we have
the experience of them.
And that requires discipline.
That's why we need meditation,
why we need tapping,
why we need to stick
with it over time.
But if you stick with it over
time, good things happen.
You build that
positive neural bundle
that was so tiny at first, gets
bigger and bigger and bigger.
And the cool thing about it
is, even if you've been angry
for 50 years and you have a
gigantic neural bundle devoted
to that, the other
flip side of the coin
is that, if you don't use
the neural bundle for three
weeks, your body notices.
It's like it notices that
you're not using that wiring
and begins to disassemble it.
So within three
weeks, it says, gee.
He's not using the
anger circuit anymore.
We have better uses
for those molecules.
It then repurpose those
to build new circuits.
So our brains are
in this dynamic flow
of rewiring with every
thought and every moment.
And so if you have
negative beliefs,
if you quit thinking
those thoughts,
adding fuel to the
fire, emotional fuel
to the fire that is
signaling those circuits,
they start to change.
In studies of long term,
long term meditators,
research shows that
their brains start
to function very differently.
The amygdala, which is
the brain's fire alarms,
the main organ which
sends that stress
signal throughout
your whole body,
it literally atrophies
in long term meditators.
Because they're not
using those signals.
And the circuits of joy,
of happiness, of peace,
of emotion regulation,
begin to grow.
In one of the case histories
in my book "Mind to Matter,"
the man in this case
history was a TV host
and an astrophysicist.
And he'd heard that
meditation produced benefits.
So he thought,
I'll give it a try.
But he had a TV crew with
him, went into a university
laboratory, and had a
comprehensive workup
of his reaction times, his
stress levels, his hormones,
his brain function.
And in a high
resolution MRI, they
measured the volume of
every part of his brain.
He then began to
meditate, be mindful.
So week after week
after week, he
began to feel more
and more peaceful.
He went back into the
lab after eight weeks
of mindfulness practice.
And they measured the volume of
each part of his brain again.
And some parts had grown by
2%, 3%, 4% in just eight weeks.
But the part that grew the most
was a part of the hippocampus,
that emotional midbrain
called the dentate gyrus.
And the dentate gyrus's
job is to coordinate
emotional regulation among
multiple brain regions.
His dentate gyrus, in
eight weeks, grew by 22.8.
Now think about that.
In just eight weeks of
changing consciousness,
of changing mind, the
matter of his brain,
and in particular,
the part of the brain
responsible for regulating
emotion, reducing stress,
that grew by 22.8%.
It did not take 10,000 hours.
Did not take 10
years of practice.
In just eight weeks, we
can trigger remodeling
of our neural tissue.
And then we have a
much happier life.
Increased emotion regulation
means, I don't yell at my kids.
I don't give people the finger
and have road rage when I'm
driving to work in the morning.
I'm not screaming
at my colleagues.
I'm not causing my heart to
race and raising my cortisol
with stress.
Emotion regulation is key.
And you do it much better
when you build those circuits.
So we can build those circuits.
They then change the whole
experience we have of life.
But you have to start building
them in the absence of them.
So you aren't a peaceful
person at first.
And you have to practice
over and over and over again
and prioritize being peaceful,
being happy, being optimistic
over those old habits.
It takes a while to do that.
That's why it's called practice.
But build those
circuits long enough,
they get bigger and
bigger and bigger.
And then all those circuits
of stress and anger
just start to go away.
You might look the same.
Your face might look the
same after a few weeks
of doing this.
Inside your brain, you
have a whole new brain.
A friend of mine named Beth was
diagnosed with breast cancer.
And they found a lump on
the top of her right breast.
Eventually, it was measured
at five centimeters
across, big, solid tumor.
She was being treated by a
famous cancer clinic called
MD Anderson in Houston,
Texas and having
great oncologists, great
surgeons, great staff there.
Once they found the
tumor, they began
to look for signs
of the cancer having
spread beyond the primary site.
And they found
that all the lymph
nodes under her right
armpit near the tumor
were all in flame.
It looked as though cancer cells
were filling those lymph nodes.
Now when cancer gets into your
lymph system, it's bad news.
It's like your bloodstream.
It goes all
throughout your body.
And once the cells, cancer
cells get into the lymph system,
they can travel
throughout the body
and produce secondary tumors
in other parts of your system.
And they then also found
three spots of inflammation
on her right lung.
So it looked as though the
process had already begun.
In fact, the diagnosis
was so serious
that the day she got
it, the oncologist,
the cancer surgeon said
to Beth, in her office,
she said, Beth,
normally we'd want you
on chemotherapy and radiation.
We'd schedule you for that soon.
This is so serious, I wanted
to go straight from my office
right now to radiology
for your first treatment.
Now Beth said-- to her credit,
said, I need time to think.
This is my body.
These are my choices.
I need to just step back
from this for a moment.
So she did not go
straight to radiology.
And so she called friends
and e-mailed people like me
and said, I've had
this diagnosis.
What do I do?
She got a lot of help, a
lot of recommendations.
And she decided to use
energy on her issue
before conventional treatment.
And she cleaned up all of
the stress in her life.
She turned off the
alerts on her cell phone.
She quit watching the news.
She quit any kind of input
that could upset her or produce
stress in her body.
She began to do Qigong.
She did EFT tapping.
She really amped up her
meditation practice.
She cleaned up her diet.
Her diet was pretty good, but
she made her diet impeccable.
She did everything
possible to help herself.
So she got this
diagnosis in March.
She went back into the
hospital in May for a follow up
eight weeks later.
And all the lymph nodes on
her right armpit were clear.
The tumor had shrunk from 5
centimeters to 1.4 centimeters.
Now of course, the doctor
said, well, let's just
stay with the surgery right
now and we'll cut that out.
And Beth said, I don't think so.
She also called me right
after she got the diagnosis
and said, Dawson,
I've had a gene test.
And I have eight defective
genes, some of which
predispose me to breast cancer.
And I said her,
well, Beth, you have
24,000 genes in your cells.
That means you have
23,992 that are just fine.
Let's work with those.
[LAUGHING]
So again, she did
all these things
to raise, elevate her mood,
to make herself happier,
to shift her energy.
And within just eight
weeks, that big change
had happened with the tumor
shrinking and her lymph nodes
being clear.
Later on blood tests
showed there was not
a trace of cancer in her body.
And it's been several
years now and there's still
no cancer in her body.
That's the power of
mind over matter.
That's not to say we'll
never need surgery,
we'll never need a pill.
You may need surgery.
You may need a drug.
But first of all, what
we do energetically,
what we do at the
level of consciousness
to shift your cells, our
thoughts, our consciousness
is so powerful, we're having
these effects on our bodies
all the time.
Use that as the
first thing you do
when you have a financial
challenge, a relationship
challenge, a health challenge.
What can energy do to shift
your body, your finances,
your relationships, and
the world around you?
Personal growth
and psychology have
been making a fundamental
error for a century.
And that is, we measure
how sick people are
and deficits and mental health.
So if I go into a
psychologist with anxiety,
they'll measure
my anxiety level.
And if my treatment
is successful,
I'll have zero anxiety
at the end of it.
So we're measuring
depression, anxiety, and pain.
And the goal is zero.
But we don't want zero.
We want to become
vibrantly healthy.
We don't want to just have
no pain and no anxiety
and no depression.
We want to have vibrant health.
We want ecstasy every day.
And so the new science
of personal growth,
the new human potential
is, what's above zero?
And how high above
zero can we go?
And the answer is,
way above zero.
We can achieve ecstatic states
in meditation and by tapping
and reducing our stress.
So what I'm really
interested in right now
is that whole question,
how far we go.
And research shows
that even people
who meditated for
40,000 lifetime
hours, a long, long,
long, long, long time,
many hours every day, even
those people, their brains
keep changing.
The happiness centers
keep on getting bigger.
The stress centers like the
amygdala keep on shrinking.
So we're now producing all
these beneficial changes
in our brains and our bodies.
So ask yourself this question.
Who would you be if you
didn't have your old story?
If you were free of all the
things that hold you back?
You could soar.
There's evidence showing
that we human beings
have remarkable
capacities and we're just
beginning to exercise them.
And what moves the needle
more than anything else
is two things, gratitude
and compassion.
Those two-- in
brain research, it's
shown that compassion
shifts brain function
more than anything else.
And what's been happening
over the last 300 years
is that we, as a human
species, have been
becoming more compassionate.
300 years ago, there were
no democracies in the world.
300 years ago, slavery was
prevalent all over the place.
300 years ago, no
woman had the vote.
300 years ago, child labor
was thought to be normal.
In just a few decades,
we reversed position
globally on slavery, on
democracy, on women's rights,
on child labor.
We've become more and more
and more compassionate
as a species for
the last few years.
And it's changing our brains.
In the last 33 years, the wealth
of the average global citizen
has tripled.
Global wealth of the average
citizen has gone up 100 fold
since 1800.
Infant mortality
has been dropping.
Human rights have
been improving.
Every measure of
human flourishing
has been increasing
over the last while.
And a lot of it, I think, is
due to our more compassionate
brains.
So I believe that
problems we have
today-- we have all
these problems the world.
We have global warming.
We have weaponized
artificial intelligence
that's threatening to
produce all kinds of problems
among societies and
between nations.
We have human trafficking.
We have civil wars.
We have all these things.
We look at the world and say,
those things are terrible.
How do you solve them?
But research shows that
in these blissful states,
in these ecstatic states, they
don't just make us feel better.
And they don't have
to extend meditation.
They extend to the
world around us.
A 10 year study of high
performing executives
by the McKinsey
Consultancy found
that in flow states like
meditation producers,
our productivity
increases by 500%.
A study by the Defense
Research Agency,
DARPA, found that in
those elevated states,
our problem solving
ability increases by 490%.
Our creativity explodes.
So now, as we're having
many, many people
entering these
blissful states, we
have increased leverage
over those global problems.
How many more people?
Well, around 1980, about
1% of the population
in most countries were
meditators, had some clue
about seeking enlightenment,
seeking inner peace.
If you look back in history,
go back to the Middle Ages,
there a survey showing
that about 1% of people
were in some way engaged
in a spiritual journey.
And this 1% is very consistent
throughout the world,
throughout history.
But in 2005, about 4% of
Americans were meditating.
So it got from 1% in 1980 to 4%.
The latest research shows
it's about 15% of people.
So having this huge
growth curve of people
entering these states at which
their productivity and problem
solving ability quintuples.
Now we have all these brains.
And they're not only
individual brains.
They're coherent
with each other.
If I'm in coherence, in mental
coherence, in heart coherence,
I'm not only in
coherence with myself.
I'm in coherence with everyone
on the planet who's coherent.
So we have all of these
brains in these states.
And the number of people doing
this increasing exponentially
bringing all that problem
solving ability to bear
on these wicked problems.
I am an absolute
optimist for the future.
I think we'll solve
all of these problems
and we'll rise unprecedented
heights of flourishing.
Because the process is
geometric in its progression.
We get more and more
and more into the state.
We produce more and more of
these neurochemical chemicals.
We change our brains
more and more.
We accelerate the
process of happiness.
And we then start to change
the world in ways that
make us flourish even more.
So the last 300
years, we've been
creating, through compassion,
unprecedented flourishing.
Over the next 10,
20, 50 years, we'll
be solving those problems with
the increased capacity we have.
So as you elevate
yourself above zero
to that space of being in
bliss brain, being happy,
feeling good, but also
changing your brain
and then having all of those
human capacities come online,
they are not just there
for you in meditation.
They're there for the world
and the world outside of you.
So I believe we're going to
solve all kinds of problems
and increase the process.
So the world my grandchildren
live in, I'm telling you--
I went on a flight.
I went on a plane
trip this last week.
And there was a long queue
to get through security,
go through the metal
detectors, get on the plane.
I'm willing to bet that my
grandchildren, when they take
a flight, they'll just drop
their bags off and walk
onto the plane, no
metal detectors.
That's the world
we're heading to,
a world of peace, a world of
love, a world where compassion
is the norm.
I dream of a day when my
grandchildren come to me
and say, granddaddy, I have a
school project I'm working on.
It's on this thing called--
is it PSTD or PTSD?
How do you spell it?
I know granddaddy used to be
involved in research into this.
He used to work with
veterans and refugees.
But I don't know anyone
with this weird disease.
What is it like?
You know?
Now your grandparents talk
about diphtheria and polio.
And you don't know what
those diseases even are.
I want a world where
our children don't
know what depression
is or anxiety or PTSD.
It's unknown now.
And we really have
it in our grasp.
Science shows, we
have it in our grasp,
to produce that kind of a world.
We have those tools right now
and we're moving inevitably
toward deploying
them to solving all
these bigger human problems.
So the world is changing.
We're in the middle of it.
We are the people.
Now is the time.
It is such an exciting
moment to be alive,
because that's where we're
headed in the aggregate,
in the global, in the long term.
>> Dawson Church, you're an
enormously infectious force
for good.
I love and cherish
this conversation
that we've just had.
And I kick myself a
little bit that we
didn't organize this
earlier, because this message
is enormously important.
And I'm glad and gracious that
we get to bring it to the world
through these projects.
I thank you so
much for your time.
[LAUGHING]
>> It's a pleasure.
>> Thank you.
[GENTLE MUSIC]